_____________________________________________________________________________

                             P h o t o F i l e r

                Picture thumbnailing extension for the Filer

                    Written by David Thomas, й 1998-2008

                         version 2.08 (05 Feb 2008)
_____________________________________________________________________________

____________

Introduction
____________

PhotoFiler adds picture "thumbnails" to the Filer.

With PhotoFiler loaded, file type icons are replaced with a miniature version
of the respective picture. This is useful for organising collections of
pictures, as it enables you to rapidly identify the contents of a file simply
by looking at its icon.

In addition to thumbnailing, PhotoFiler provides additional controls over the
presentation of icons in directory displays. You can define your own icons
for directories which will be used instead of the usual directory sprites.
This is ideal for providing a graphic representation of a directory's
purpose.

PhotoFiler also attempts to address a long-standing quirk н that of the pling
("!") character in front of application names. These can hidden from view in
directory viewers, giving neater looking directory displays.

PhotoFiler requires RISC OS 3.6 or later. RISC OS 3.5 is supported, if the
SpriteExtend 0.99 and DrawFile 1.30 modules are available (see the section
"Compatibility" below).

PhotoFiler is freeware.

________

Features
________

 * Sprites, JPEGs, DrawFiles and ArtWorks are thumbnailed in the background
   and displayed in place of the usual file type icon. If you have ImageFS,
   PhotoFiler will generate thumbnails for all of the formats it supports.

 * Full control over the dithering of thumbnails is provided for Sprites and
   JPEGs.

 * Pictures which are found to be faulty are shown with a "warning" symbol.

 * Directories can be given customised sprites by merging a sprite into the
   common sprite pool. Sprites can be provided for the four possible
   directory states of open/closed and selected/unselected.

 * The pling symbol ("!") can be removed from the start of application names,
   giving neater looking directory displays. This modification occurs in
   display only so that sorting orders are not affected.

 * PhotoFiler is a module written in 100% ARM assembler and completely
   transparent in operation. None of the Filer module's code is modified,
   and PhotoFiler uses very little memory itself.

_________

Interface
_________

Icon Bar Icon
иииииииииииии
  SELECT on the icon bar icon opens the Control Panel.
  MENU opens the icon bar menu.


Control Panel
иииииииииииии
The control panel is available by clicking SELECT on the icon bar icon.

  Thumbnails
  ииииииииии
  Maximum size               Sets the maximum size of thumbnails that will
                             be generated. See "Sizes" below.
                             
  Multitasking               Sets the maximum amount of time PhotoFiler will
                             use when generating thumbnails. Larger values
                             will generate thumbnails more quickly, at the
                             expense of lumpier multitasking.

  Indicate file type         Adds a small file type icon in the bottom left-
                             hand corner of the thumbnail, if it can.

  Sprites
  иииииии
  Show Sprite thumbnails     When set, sprite files will be thumbnailed.

  Simple dithering           Performs a simple dithering technique on the
                             thumbnail.

  Application sprites        When set, sprites that are part of applications,
                             called "!Sprites", "Sprites22", etc. will not
                             be thumbnailed.

  JPEGs
  иииии
  Show JPEG thumbnails       When set, JPEG images will be thumbnailed.

  No dithering               Quickest, but lowest quality, thumbnails.

  Simple dithering           Medium speed, medium quality, thumbnails.

  Error diffusion            Slowest, but highest quality, thumbnails.
                             (Note that you're unlikely to notice any
                              great speed or quality difference between
                              these last two options).

  DrawFiles
  иииииииии
  Show Draw thumbnails       When set, DrawFiles will be thumbnailed.
  
  ArtWorks
  ииииииии
  Show ArtWorks thumbnails   When set, ArtWorks will be thumbnailed.
  
  Quality                    Allows you to choose the ArtWorks "WYSIWYG"
                             setting.
  
  ImageFS
  иииииии
  Show ImageFS thumbnails    When set, files convertable by ImageFS will be
                             thumbnailed.
                             
                             Recognising ImageFS file types does incur a
                             slight speed hit, so you are advised to leave
                             this option off if you don't use ImageFS.

  Applications
  ииииииииииии
  Hide plings                When set, applications will have their initial
                             pling character ("!") removed from view.
                               
  Control panel
  иииииииииииии
  Auto-quit                  When set, the control panel will load and
                             initialise the module, but not appear on the
                             desktop. Hold down Ctrl when PhotoFiler
                             starts to force the control panel to appear.


Icon Bar Menu
иииииииииииии
  Quit

    -> Control panel only    Removes PhotoFiler's control panel only, the
                             PhotoFiler module which does the "real" work
                             will remain active.

    -> All of PhotoFiler     Removes PhotoFiler completely from memory.

__________

Thumbnails
__________

Generation
ииииииииии
PhotoFiler starts generating thumbnails on the fly as soon as you open a
directory display containing Sprites, JPEGs or DrawFiles.

The first thing you will notice upon opening such a directory is that the
picture's usual file icon is shown in shaded grey until the thumbnail is
generated. You will normally only see this icon for a fraction of a second,
especially on faster machines, as even the largest thumbnails take only a few
seconds to load and render. Once the thumbnail is ready, it is displayed in
the place of the icon in the Filer window. Thumbnails are processed in the
background so you can continue to use the desktop whilst thumbnailing is
taking place.

Only icons that are visible on screen are "seen" by PhotoFiler. This means
that if you scroll a directory display to reveal more icons, they will then
be noticed by PhotoFiler and processed.


Sizes
иииии
PhotoFiler always attempts to generate the largest size thumbnail it can,
given the aspect ratio of the picture and the size you can specify in the
control panel.

The largest thumbnail which will fit in the Filer icon space is 172 by 74 OS
units, which equates to a maximum of 86 by 37 pixels in a regular square
pixel mode. Due to the way Filer windows are laid out, any thumbnails bigger
than that would be displayed incorrectly and obscured by the text of the
filename.

Thumbnails are always created in the current screen mode so that they can be
rendered and displayed quickly. However, if you change screen mode the
existing thumbnails won't be re-generated.


Validation
ииииииииии
All three types of directly supported image are tested for completeness and
integrity before being rendered. Any file that fails this validation step
will be shown with a "warning" symbol.


Modification
ииииииииииии
PhotoFiler watches for changes to files and will re-generate a thumbnail if
it sees its associated disc file has changed.


Limits
ииииии
PhotoFiler can handle any number of thumbnails in any number of directory
displays simultaneously, although things will slow down proportionately with
the number of directory displays that are active. In normal use, you are
unlikely to notice this.


Sprite Thumbnails
иииииииииииииииии
Sprite thumbnails are generated using RISC OS's sprite scaling features.

When the "Application sprites" option is off, PhotoFiler will not generate
thumbnails for files with the word "Sprites" in their name. This stops most
sprite files belonging to applications being shown. (Note that this check is
case-sensitive).

If a sprite has no palette present then the default desktop palette is used.
This matches the behaviour of RISC OS Paint when its "Use desktop colours"
option is on.

Only the first sprite of a multiple-sprite file will be shown.


JPEG Thumbnails
иииииииииииииии
The JPEG rendering feature of SpriteExtend 0.99 and later is used to generate
thumbnails for JPEG images.

The SpriteExtend JPEG rendering calls are quite particular about the files
that they will render. Images with certain non-standard settings in the file
header will often be rejected. You may wish to obtain one of the
jpegtran-based utilities which can "clean" and optimise these JPEG images.

Progressive (sometimes referred to as "interlaced") JPEGs cannot be
thumbnailed, unless they are first converted to normal JPEGs by using
jpegtran.


DrawFile Thumbnails
иииииииииииииииииии
PhotoFiler uses the DrawFile module, built into RISC OS 3.6 and later, to
generate thumbnails of DrawFiles.

The DrawFile module performs no anti-aliasing when scaling down, so
thumbnails may look innacurate with respect to the original file. This is
especially evident if "thin" lines are used in the DrawFile.

If fonts are used in the DrawFile, then a large font cache will speed things
up.


ArtWorks Thumbnails
иииииииииииииииииии
AWRender 1.34 or later must be present in order for PhotoFiler to render
ArtWorks thumbnails.


ImageFS Thumbnails
ииииииииииииииииии
If you have Alternative Publishing's ImageFS software loaded and enabled,
PhotoFiler will use it to generate thumbnails for all of the file formats it
supports, including WMFs.

Note that if you don't have ImageFS, you should leave the "Show ImageFS
thumbnails" off, as it incurs a slight speed hit for ImageFS file types.

________________________

Custom Directory Sprites
________________________

PhotoFiler can adjust the sprite used by the Filer to represent directories.
This is done by defining a new sprite for each possible directory icon state
and merging that sprite into the Wimp sprite pool (using *IconSprites).

                                            Sprite    Small sprite
                                            ииииии    ииииииииииии
           Directory closed, unselected    #dirname    sm#dirname
           Directory closed, selected      $dirname    sm$dirname
           Directory open,   unselected    %dirname    sm%dirname
           Directory open,   selected      &dirname    sm&dirname

If no sprite is found for the current sprite state, then the Filer's default
display will be used. (This behaviour isn't ideal and may be revised in a
future version to always show the appropriate #dirname sprite).

Note that when a custom directory sprite is in use, the text of the icon will
not be inverted when selected as usual.

_________________________

Hiding Application Plings
_________________________

With the "Hide application plings" option selected, the names of applications
displayed in Filer windows will be adjusted so that their initial pling
character ("!") is removed.

The advantage of this is that it gives cleaner looking directory displays and
is potentially less confusing for novices.

The character is only removed from the display of the name, it does not
affect the physical name of applications on your disc or in any other part of
the system.

Using this option will not affect the sorting order of directory displays.

_________________________

Notes and Hidden Features
_________________________

Suppressing PhotoFiler
ииииииииииииииииииииии
Holding down the Ctrl key when opening a new directory display will stop
PhotoFiler from processing that directory.

In addition there is a *Command, *PhotoFilerIgnore <wildcarded string> which
will automatically suppress PhotoFiler for a directory if its path matches
the given string. For example, the following stops PhotoFiler working on any
CDFS directory:

                          *PhotoFilerIgnore CDFS:*

The wildcard characters are "*" and "?". It is case sensitive and only works
for directory displays opened after the command is issued.


Sprite Cache Dynamic Area
иииииииииииииииииииииииии
Even if you use the "All of PhotoFiler" option to quit, PhotoFiler will not
fully remove its "PhotoFiler sprites" dynamic area. This is not a bug.

When PhotoFiler is active it sets the sprite area pointer of each newly
created directory display to point to its own sprite area. If PhotoFiler is
removed, these pointers remain in place. Removing the sprite cache area
whilst these directory displays are still in use would cause a crash, so the
area is in left in place but reduced in size as much as possible.

If PhotoFiler is later restarted, then it will automatically take over any
existing sprite cache area.


Bugs in RISC OS
иииииииииииииии
Unfortunately PhotoFiler is affected by a number of faults in RISC OS. They
are detailed here.

1. There is a bug in both current variants of the SpriteExtend module; the
   RISC OS module which deals with JPEG images. The bug is three redundant
   instructions which perform a read from an assumed location in the
   controlling task's wimpslot. This causes an "abort on data transfer"
   exception if the calling application has less than 24K of wimpslot.

   Since PhotoFiler is not a wimp task, it has no wimpslot, so calling
   SpriteExtend to render JPEG images will always fail. PhotoFiler
   automatically fixes this bug by copying the SpriteExtend module into RAM
   and disabling the redundant instructions. Where it needs to be applied,
   this fix takes approximately 75K of memory.

2. There is another bug in RISC OS's own sprite handling code which causes
   apparently random crashes. PhotoFiler includes a work-around fix for
   this. The net result of this is that PhotoFiler has to claim at most one
   page (4K) more sprite memory than it actually needs.

3. And again, there is another bug in SpriteExtend which means that JPEGs
   which scale to one pixel in either thumbnail dimension will be rejected
   in order to prevent a machine crash.

___________

Limitations
___________

 * PhotoFiler is not able to deduce the name of objects whose filenames have
   been truncated in display using RISC OS 4's "maximum displayed filename
   width" feature. These files are ignored.

 * Pictures are loaded whole into memory before being rendered, up to a limit
   of 16Mb. Pictures which are too large to load will be shown with the
   "warning" icon.

 * If PhotoFiler should run out of memory, then it will start showing
   thumbnails with the "warning" icon. If memory is in very short supply
   then PhotoFiler will ignore the icons completely.

_____________

Compatibility
_____________

RISC OS 3.5
иииииииииии
PhotoFiler requires the functionality of two modules which are only present
in RISC OS 3.6 or later. To use PhotoFiler on RISC OS 3.5, you should obtain
the archives "drawfile.arc" and "spriteextend.arc" as were available from
Acorn's FTP site, and install them appropriately into your !Boot sequence.

The SpriteExtend module is supplied ready to be merged into your !Boot
sequence.

The DrawFile module should be placed in !System, in the directory
"!System.350.Modules" if you have it or "!System.Modules" otherwise.

________

Versions
________

2.08 (05 Feb 2008)
 - PhotoFiler is now once again freeware.

2.07 (15 Apr 2004)
2.06 (16 Feb 2004)
 - 32-bit compatible.
 - Uses WimpSWIVe 0.07.
 - Updated "wait" icons for RISC OS 5.

2.05 (08 Feb 2003)
 - Added an adjustment to the ArtWorks error handling from Martin W№rthner.

2.04 (15 Jan 2002)
 - Rendering of ArtWorks thumbnails is now supported.

2.03 (03 Apr 2001)
 - PhotoFiler can now plot the file type sprite in the bottom left-hand
   corner of a thumbnail. This will only work where a suitable "small_..."
   sprite is available in the Wimp sprite pool.

2.01 (18 Jul 2000)
 - Minor updates.
 - Corrections to documentation.
 - Truncated leafnames are now ignored, instead of showing up as an error.
 - The bounding box wasn't being set when the thumbnail was first made. This
   meant the directory display could flicker when a thumbnail was refreshed
   after being generated. Note that directory displays sometimes flicker
   anyway when ImageFS support is enabled. This is an issue with image filing
   systems and the Filer.

2.00 (18 May 2000)
 - First commercial release through Warm Silence Software.
 - PhotoFiler is now capable of optionally using Alternative Publishing's
   ImageFS software to generate thumbnails.
 - Filing system activity is monitored so thumbnails can now be re-generated
   if the associated file changes.
 - Thumbnails are now generated in a left-to-right, top-to-bottom order.
   This is the reverse of previous versions.
 - Added *PhotoFilerIgnore command, allowing directory displays to be
   ignored based on a wildcarded string.
 - PhotoCheck program now fixes RISC OS 4 SpriteExtend.
 - Multitasking control added.
 - Maximum size control added.
 - Optimised.

_______

Credits
_______

Many thanks to go to Justin Fletcher for his original source upon which this
program is based and to the brave souls who took part in the testing of
prerelease versions.

Thanks to Andrew Clover and Andrew Booker for the WimpSWIVe module.

Thanks to Martin W№rthner for his work in making the AWRender module function
when called from SVC mode.

Thanks to Robin Watts and Paul Gardiner of Warm Silence Software.

_________

Copyright
_________

This software ("PhotoFiler") is copyrighted work of David Thomas, it is
supplied to you, the user, "as is"; you use this application entirely at your
own risk. The author and publisher make no warranty as to the fitness of
this software for any purpose. In no circumstances will the author or
publisher be liable for any loss arising from the use or inability to use
this software.

_________________

Contact Addresses
_________________

If you have any comments, bug reports or suggestions for future versions then
you can contact dave@davespace.co.uk.

If you have a question, then please check it has not already been answered in
this documentation before mailing.
_____________________________________________________________________________

